---
title: "Simplifying complexity"
permalink: index.html
---

Ask a technical writer what they do, and the most common response is that tech writers "simplify complexity." In systems that are complex (supporting many tasks, options, functions, and information), we figure out user goals and create clear instructions on how users can achieve those goals. The technical writer's core value is in his or her ability to simplify information in these complex systems.

But for all the talk about simplifying complexity, there's not a lot written on *how* to do it. Just how do you make complex processes and concepts easy to follow? How do you help users achieve their goals in the context of sophisticated, confusing applications and code? Explaining concepts in plain language and using task-based steps is a great start, but it's not the entire solution. We need to increase our skill at this game. Technical writers need to center on what's complex for users, and use all the tools available to turn up the simplicity factor in ways that add real value to organizations.

I’m fascinated by the idea that my core value as a technical writer involves helping users make sense of complex systems. We can center our efforts around the user’s greatest pain, because that is where we can deliver the greatest value — and that is also where the space is the most interesting. We don’t deliver value by documenting simple, obvious instructions, or by providing instructions for interfaces and workflows that are already well-designed and intuitive. We deliver value by first identifying what users struggle with most, their point of most complexity and frustration, and then we wrestle that beast to the ground, pinning it into submission.

As a profession, I think we need more focus on ways to simplify complexity. In this section of my site, I'll build out a number of techniques and approaches for simplifying complexity. My hope is that by understanding the right techniques and approaches, we can do our jobs better. We can provide more value in our roles. As we simplify complexity in deep ways, we can move beyond merely being perceived as secretaries, grammarians, or editors. We move past roles as curators or publishers. We become knowledge creators, champions of usability in information spaces.

The task of simplifying complexity is even more difficult in the landscape of developer and API documentation. Developers have deeper, more comprehensive technical skills and understanding than most technical writers. And yet, even so, technical writers can still simplify information in ways that become vital to the developer's success. Of course, simplifying complexity involves understanding enough of the domain and customer journey to speak at their level and in their terminology, but it's more than that. Simplifying complexity involves incorporating a host of techniques that go beyond mere transmission of knowledge in a particular domain.

Some of these techniques might involve providing journey maps that carry users through a process from beginning to end. Other techniques might involve providing high-level summaries and overviews that crystallize key points from large swaths of information, perhaps condensing it into quick reference guides. The approach for simplifying complexity might involve tagging content with the right metadata to be surfaced when the user needs it. Or consuming the entirety of the information space to see just how the piece we're adding integrates and harmonizes with everything else. It might involve looking beyond our product to consider the larger journey our users are on &mdash; even before they arrived at our product.

I will approach this topic similar to my [API documentation site](http://idratherbewriting.com/learnapidoc/). That is, I'll add to it continually over a period of months and years, constantly refining it and developing the content based on continued feedback, thoughts, research, and experiments.

To get started, you can read the topics in any order, as they are self-contained and not sequential. One of my favorites is the first topic: [Switching between macro and micro views with embedded maps](http://idratherbewriting.com/simplifying-complexity/macro-micro.html). I welcome your feedback and insights.
